# The Ethics and Efficacy of Data-Driven Technology in Local Policing
In this document, I discuss two articles covering the issue of data-driven policing in the criminal justice system. I present and discuss two supplementary viewpoints arguing for changes and successes in the way that data and AI are currently utilized by local police departments.

## Article 1
In a piece by Will Douglas Heaven in the MIT Technology Review, [Predictive policing algorithms are racist. They need to be dismantled.](https://www.technologyreview.com/2020/07/17/1005396/predictive-policing-algorithms-racist-dismantled-machine-learning-bias-criminal-justice/), Heaven explains some of the reasons for the decision to transition from humans to algorithms in risk assessment departments, citing the lower costs associated with automated systems, as well the "widespread belief that [algorithms] are more objective than humans." The article continues to outline questions about the efficacy of data-driven technology, such as PredPol and COMPAS, which are used to inform the allocation of police to particular neighborhoods and to determine pre-trial sentencing, bail, and parole, respectively. At the core of his argument, Heaven emphasizes that the issue is not so much the technology being employed, as it is this "bad data" on which these algorithms are constructed and tested and the lack of transparency by which such systems are employed and financed by local police departments. More specifically, Heaven notes that the data on which these algorithms are based, including historic arrest data, socioeconomic factors, zip codes, etc., only reproduce and further entrench existing biases and implicit racism in the criminal justice system. 

## Article 2
In a second piece by Dave Davies in NPR, [Surveillance And Local Police: How Technology Is Evolving Faster Than Regulation](https://www.npr.org/2021/01/27/961103187/surveillance-and-local-police-how-technology-is-evolving-faster-than-regulation), Davies interviews Journalist Jon Fasman about his upcoming book titled "We See It All: Liberty and Justice in an Age of Perpetual Surveillance", which outlines issues at the intersection of technology and policing. In addition to briefly supporting Heaven's argument on predictive policing algorithms, Fasman more generally expands on the issue of security and transparency in data collection. Fasman speaks more expansively on technology that indiscriminately gathers data on license plates and cellphone activity for criminal investigations. Fasman notes that although these technologies are often targeted to specific suspects and general civilian data is discarded immediately by most police departments, there is no federal regulation on how long such data can be kept nor how it should be stored. Fasman raises questions of the security of personal data collected by police departments along with concerns about local policies making 24-hr surveillance technology accessible to the general public in cities like Newark, to argue his main point that as the criminal justice system increases its use of technology it becomes crucial for the efficacy of such technology to be weighed against ethics of expanding an invasive police state in "a free, open, liberal democracy."